Overview of Circadian 
Rhythms 
Martha Hotz Vitaterna, Ph.D., Joseph S. Takahashi, Ph.D., 
and Fred W. Turek, Ph.D. 
The daily light-dark cycle governs rhythmic changes in the behavior and/or physiology of most 
species. Studies have found that these changes are governed by a biological clock, which in 
mammals is located in two brain areas called the suprachiasmatic nuclei. The circadian cycles 
established by this clock occur throughout nature and have a period of approximately 24 
hours. In addition, these circadian cycles can be synchronized to external time signals but also 
can persist in the absence of such signals. Studies have found that the internal clock consists of 
an array of genes and the protein products they encode, which regulate various physiological 
processes throughout the body. Disruptions of the biological rhythms can impair the health 
and well-being of the organism. KEY WORDS: circadian rhythm; time of day; biological regulation; 
biological adaptation; temperature; light; hypothalamus; neural cell; gene expression; 
mutagenesis; sleep disorder; physiological AODE (effects of alcohol or other drug use, abuse, 
and dependence) 
O
ne of the most dramatic features 
of the world in which we live is 
the cycle of day and night. Cor­
respondingly, almost all species exhibit daily 
changes in their behavior and/or physiol­
ogy. These daily rhythms are not simply a 
response to the 24-hour changes in the 
physical environment imposed by the earth 
turning on its axis but, instead, arise from 
a timekeeping system within the organism. 
This timekeeping system, or biological 
“clock,” allows the organism to anticipate 
and prepare for the changes in the physi­
cal environment that are associated with 
day and night, thereby ensuring that the 
organism will “do the right thing” at the 
right time of the day. The biological clock 
also provides internal temporal organiza­
tion and ensures that internal changes take 
place in coordination with one another. 
The synchrony of an organism with 
both its external and internal environ­
ments is critical to the organism’s well-
being and survival; a lack of synchrony 
between the organism and the external 
environment may lead to the individ­
ual’s immediate demise. For example, if 
a nocturnal rodent were to venture from 
its burrow during broad daylight, the 
rodent would be exceptionally easy 
prey for other animals. Similarly, a lack 
of synchrony within the internal envi­
ronment might lead to health problems 
in the individual, such as those associated 
with jet lag, shift work, and the accom­
panying sleep loss (e.g., impaired cog­
nitive function, altered hormonal func­
tion, and gastrointestinal complaints). 
The mechanisms underlying the 
biological timekeeping systems and the 
potential consequences of their failure 
are among the issues addressed by 
researchers in the field of chronobiology.1 
In its broadest sense, chronobiology 
encompasses all research areas focusing 
on biological timing, including high-
frequency cycles (e.g., hormone secre­
tion occurring in distinct pulses through-
MARTHA HOTZ VITATERNA, PH.D., is a 
senior research associate in the Center for 
Functional Genomics, Northwestern 
University, Evanston, Illinois. 
JOSEPH S. TAKAHASHI, PH.D., is the director 
of the Center for Functional Genomics, 
the Walter and Mary E. Glass Professor 
in the Department of Neurobiology and 
Physiology, and an investigator at the 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois. 
FRED W. TUREK, PH.D., is the director of 
the Center for Sleep and Circadian Biology 
and is the Charles T. and Emma H. 
Morrison Professor in the Department of 
Neurobiology and Physiology, Northwestern 
University, Evanston, Illinois. 
1For a definition of this and other technical terms used in 
this article and throughout this issue of the journal, please 
see glossary, p. 92. 
Vol. 25, No. 2, 2001 
85 

out the day), daily cycles (e.g., activity 
and rest cycles), and monthly or annual 
cycles (e.g., reproductive cycles in some 
species). Among these interrelated areas 
of chronobiology, this article focuses on 
one frequency domain—the daily cycles 
known as circadian rhythms. (The term 
“circadian” derives from the Latin phrase 
“circa diem,” which means “about a 
day.”) Although virtually all life forms— 
including bacteria, fungi, plants, fruit 
flies, fish, mice, and humans—exhibit 
circadian rhythms, this review is primar­
ily limited to the mammalian system. 
Other animals are discussed only in 
cases in which they have contributed to 
the understanding of the mammalian 
system, particularly in studies of the 
molecular genetic makeup of the time-
keeping system. (For comparative dis­
cussions of other nonmammalian model 
systems that have contributed to the 
depth of understanding of circadian 
rhythmicity in mammals, the reader is 
referred to Wager-Smith and Kay 2000.) 
Overall, this article has the following 
major objectives: (1) to provide a highly 
selective historical overview of the field, 
(2) to review characteristic properties of 
circadian rhythms, (3) to define the 
structural components and the molecu­
lar genetic mechanisms comprising the 
biological clock, and (4) to explore the 
health effects of biological rhythms. 
Historical Overview 
of Chronobiology 
Researchers began studying biological 
rhythms approximately 50 years ago. 
Although no single experiment serves 
as the defining event from which to 
date the beginning of modern research 
in chronobiology, studies conducted in 
the 1950s on circadian rhythmicity in 
fruit flies by Colin Pittendrigh and in 
humans by Jürgen Aschoff can be con­
sidered its foundation. The area of sleep 
research, which also is subsumed under 
the field of chronobiology, evolved some-
what independently, with the identifi­
cation of various sleep stages by Nathaniel 
Kleitman around the same time (Dement 
2000). The legacies of these pioneers 
continue today with the advancement 
of the fields they founded. 
The roots of the study of biological 
rhythms, however, reach back even fur­
ther, to the 1700s and the work of the 
French scientist de Mairan, who pub­
lished a monograph describing the daily 
leaf movements of a plant. De Mairan 
observed that the daily raising and low-
Virtually all 
life forms— 
including bacteria, 
fungi, plants, fruit 
flies, fish, mice, 
and humans— 
exhibit circadian 
rhythms. 
ering of the leaves continued even when 
the plant was placed in an interior room 
and thus was not exposed to sunlight. 
This finding suggested that the move­
ments represented something more 
than a simple response to the sun and 
were controlled by an internal clock. 
Characteristic Properties 
of Circadian Rhythms 
De Mairan’s apt observations illustrate one 
critical feature of circadian rhythms— 
their self-sustained nature. Thus, almost 
all diurnal rhythms that occur under 
natural conditions continue to cycle 
under laboratory conditions devoid 
of any external time-giving cues from 
the physical environment (e.g., under 
constant light or constant darkness). 
Circadian rhythms that are expressed 
in the absence of any 24-hour signals 
from the external environment are called 
free running. This means that the rhythm 
is not synchronized by any cyclic change 
in the physical environment. Strictly 
speaking, a diurnal rhythm should not 
be called circadian until it has been 
shown to persist under constant envi­
ronmental conditions and thereby can 
be distinguished from those rhythms 
that are simply a response to 24-hour 
environmental changes. For practical 
purposes, however, there is little reason 
to distinguish between diurnal and cir­
cadian rhythms, because almost all 
diurnal rhythms are found to be circa­
dian. Nor is a terminology distinction 
made among circadian rhythms based 
on the type of environmental stimulus 
that synchronizes the cycle. 
The persistence of rhythms in the 
absence of a dark-light cycle or other 
exogenous time signal (i.e., a Zeitgeber) 
clearly seems to indicate the existence 
of some kind of internal timekeeping 
mechanism, or biological clock. How-
ever, some investigators have pointed out 
that the persistence of rhythmicity does 
not necessarily exclude the possibility 
that other, uncontrolled cycles gener­
ated by the Earth’s revolution on its 
axis might be driving the rhythm (see 
Aschoff 1960). 
The hypothesis that such uncon­
trolled geomagnetic cues might play a 
role in the persistence of rhythmicity 
can be refuted by a second characteris­
tic feature of circadian rhythms: These 
cycles persist with a period of close to, 
but not exactly, 24 hours. If the rhythms 
were exogenously driven, they should 
persist with a period of exactly 24 hours. 
The seeming imprecision is an impor­
tant feature of rhythmicity, however. As 
Pittendrigh (1960) demonstrated, the 
deviation from a 24-hour cycle actually 
provides a means for the internal time-
keeping system to be continuously 
aligned by and aligned to the light-dark 
environment. This continuous adjust­
ment results in greater precision in 
controlling the timing, or phase, of the 
expressed rhythms, because little drift 
is allowed to occur before the rhythm 
is “reset” to the correct phase. 
A third characteristic property of 
circadian rhythms is their ability to be 
synchronized, or entrained, by external 
time cues, such as the light-dark cycle. 
Thus, although circadian rhythms can 
persist in the absence of external time 
cues (meaning that they are not driven 
by the environment), normally such 
cues are present and the rhythms are 
aligned to them. Accordingly, if a shift 
in external cues occurs (e.g., following 
travel across time zones), the rhythms 
86 
Alcohol Research & Health 

Overview of Circadian Rhythms 
Continuous Darkness 
Amplitude 
Phase 
Period 
Time 
Level 
Night 
Day 
Night 
Day 
Figure 1 Circadian rhythm responses to light. 
A. Parameters of circadian rhythm 
A representative circadian rhythm is depicted in which the level of a particular measure 
(e.g., blood hormone levels and activity levels) varies according to time. The differ­
ence in the level between peak and trough values is the amplitude of the rhythm. 
The timing of a reference point in the cycle (e.g., the peak) relative to a fixed event 
(e.g., beginning of the night phase) is the phase. The time interval between phase 
reference points (e.g., two peaks) is called the period. The rhythm shown persists 
even in continuous darkness (i.e., is free running). 
Continuous Darkness 
Level 
Delay 
Continuous Darkness 
Time 
Advance 
B. Resetting the circadian rhythm 
The effects of a rhythm-resetting signal, such as exposure to light by animals other-
wise kept in continuous darkness, can shift the rhythm either back (upper panel) or 
ahead (lower panel), depending on when during the cycle the signal is presented. In 
the case of a phase delay, the peak levels are reached later than they would be had 
the rhythm not been shifted. In the case of a phase advance, the peak levels are 
reached earlier than they would be had the rhythm not been shifted. The black line 
shows how cycling would appear if the rhythm remained unchanged. 
Phase Shift (hours) 
0 
-6 
+6 
Advances 
Delays 
Circadian Phase of Light Exposure 
CT 0 
CT 12 
CT 0 
Subjective Day 
Subjective Night 
C. Changes in circadian rhythm in response to changes in light exposure 
Virtually all species show similar phase-dependent-resetting responses to light, which 
can be expressed as a phase-response curve. Exposure to light during the early part 
of the animal’s night causes a phase delay, whereas exposure to light in the latter part 
of the animal’s night causes a phase advance. Light exposure during the animal’s 
usual daytime period produces little or no phase shift. 
will be aligned to the new cues. This 
alignment is called entrainment. 
Initially, it was unclear whether 
entrainment was achieved by modulat­
ing the rate of cycling (i.e., whether the 
cycle was shortened or lengthened until 
it was aligned to the new cues and then 
reverted to its original length) or whether 
entrainment was achieved by discrete 
“resetting” events. Experiments result­
ing from this debate led to fundamen­
tal discoveries. For example, researchers 
discovered that the organism’s response 
to light (i.e., whether a cycle advances, 
is delayed, or remains unchanged) dif­
fers depending on the phase in the 
cycle at which it is presented (Pittendrigh 
1960). Thus, exposure to light during 
the early part of the individual’s “nor­
mal” dark period generally results in a 
phase delay, whereas exposure to light 
during the late part of the individual’s 
normal dark period generally results in 
a phase advance. This difference in 
responses can be represented by a phase-
response curve (see figure 1 for a schematic 
illustration of a circadian cycle as well 
as a phase-response curve). Such a 
curve can predict the manner in which 
an organism will entrain not only to 
shifts in the light-dark cycles but also 
to unusual light cycles, such as non-24-
hour cycles or different light:dark ratios. 
The existence of a phase-response curve 
also implies that entrainment is achieved 
by discrete resetting events rather than 
changes in the rate of cycling. 
In addition to the timing of the light 
exposure, the light intensity can modu­
late cycling periods when organisms are 
left in constant light. Thus, exposure to 
brighter light intensities can lengthen the 
period in some species and shorten it in 
other species. This phenomenon has been 
dubbed “Aschoff’s rule” (Aschoff 1960). 
Ultimately, both mechanisms of entrain­
ment appear to be aspects of the same 
thing, because the consequences of 
Aschoff’s rule can be predicted or explain­
ed by the phase-response curves to light. 
Although the light-dark cycle clearly 
is the major Zeitgeber for all organisms, 
other factors—such as social interactions, 
activity or exercise, and even tempera­
ture—also can modulate a cycle’s phase. 
The influence of temperature on circa­
dian rhythms is particularly interesting 
Vol. 25, No. 2, 2001 
87 

in that a change in temperature can 
affect the phase of a cycle without sub­
stantially altering the rate of cycling. 
This means that the cycle may start at 
an earlier or later-than-normal time but 
still have the same length. On the one 
hand, this ability of the internal clock’s 
pacemaker to compensate for changes 
in temperature is critical to its ability 
to predict and adapt to environmental 
changes, because a clock that speeds 
up and slows down as the temperature 
changes would not be useful. On the 
other hand, temperature compensation 
also is rather puzzling, because most 
kinds of biological processes (e.g., bio­
chemical reactions in the body) are accel­
erated or slowed by temperature changes. 
Ultimately, this riddle has provided a 
clue to the nature of the internal clock— 
that is, the fact that circadian rhythms 
have a genetic basis. Such a program of 
gene expression would be more resistant 
to temperature alteration than, for exam­
ple, a simple biochemical reaction. 
Two final properties of circadian 
rhythms also provide important hints 
of the rhythms’ makeup. One of these 
properties is the rhythms’ ubiquity in 
nature: Circadian rhythms exist in a 
broad array of biological processes and 
organisms, with similar properties and 
even similar phase-response curves to 
light. The other property is that circa­
dian rhythms appear to be generated at 
the cellular level, because the rhythms 
of unicellular organisms (e.g., algae or 
the dinoflagellate Gonyaulax) are much 
the same as rhythms of highly complex 
mammals. Both of these observations 
suggest that a cycle in the activation 
(i.e., expression) of certain genes might 
underlie the timekeeping mechanism. 
The Anatomical 
Organization of 
the Internal Clock 
Although studies of unicellular organisms 
point to the cellular nature of the system 
generating circadian rhythms, the circa­
dian pacemaker in higher organisms is 
located in cells of specific structures of 
the organism. These structures include 
certain regions of the brain (i.e., the optic 
and cerebral lobes) in insects; the eyes 
in certain invertebrates and vertebrates; 
and the pineal gland, which is located 
within the brain, in nonmammalian verte­
brates. In mammals, the circadian clock 
resides in two clusters of nerve cells called 
the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN), which 
are located in a region at the base of the 
brain called the anterior hypothalamus. 
In mammals, 
the circadian clock 
resides in two 
clusters of nerve 
cells called the 
suprachiasmatic 
nuclei (SCN). 
The role of the SCN was demon­
strated by the landmark discovery in 
the early 1970s that by damaging (i.e., 
lesioning) the SCN in rats, researchers 
could disrupt and abolish endocrine 
and behavioral circadian rhythms (for a 
review, see Klein et al. 1991). Further-
more, by transplanting the SCN from 
other animals into the animals with the 
lesioned SCN, investigators could restore 
some of the circadian rhythms. Finally, 
the SCN’s role as a master pacemaker 
regulating other rhythmic systems was 
confirmed by similar studies in hamsters, 
which demonstrated that the restored 
rhythms exhibited the clock properties 
(i.e., the period, or phase, of the rhythm) 
of the donor rather than of the host 
(Ralph et al. 1990). The discovery that 
the SCN is the site of primary regulation 
of circadian rhythmicity in mammals 
gave researchers a focal point for their 
research: if one wanted to understand 
24-hour timekeeping, one needed to 
study the clock in the SCN. 
Recently, however, researchers have 
been surprised to find that circadian 
rhythms could persist in isolated lungs, 
livers, and other tissues grown in a cul­
ture dish (i.e., in vitro) that were not 
under the control of the SCN (Yamazaki 
et al. 2000). These observations indi­
cate that most cells and tissues of the 
body may be capable of modulating 
their activity on a circadian basis. Such 
findings do not, however, diminish the 
central role played by the SCN as the 
master circadian pacemaker that some-
how coordinates the entire 24-hour 
temporal organization of cells, tissues, 
and the whole organism. The physio­
logical mechanisms underlying this 
coordination include signals emitted by 
the SCN that act on other nerve cells 
(i.e., neural signals) or which are also 
distributed through the blood to other 
organs (i.e., neurohormonal signals). 
To date, however, the characteristics of 
the circadian signal itself—that is, the 
specific manner in which the SCN 
“talks” to the rest of the body—remain 
unknown (see Stokkan et al. 2001). 
Although the effects of SCN lesions 
on numerous rhythms have been eluci­
dated, their effects on sleep are less clear. 
Thus, SCN lesions clearly disrupt the 
consolidation and pattern of sleep in 
rats but have only minimal effects on 
the animals’ amount of sleep or sleep 
need (Mistlberger et al. 1987). For this 
and other reasons, researchers have pos­
tulated that sleep is subject to two 
essentially independent control mecha­
nisms: (1) the circadian clock that mod­
ulates the propensity for sleep and (2) 
a homeostatic control that reflects the 
duration of prior waking (i.e., “sleep 
debt”). Recently, however, studies in 
squirrel monkeys found that SCN lesions 
can affect the amount of sleep. Moreover, 
sleep studies in mice carrying changes 
(i.e., mutations) in two of the genes 
influencing circadian cycles (i.e., the 
DBP and Clock genes) indicated that 
these mutations resulted in changes 
in sleep regulation (Naylor et al. 2000; 
Franken et al. 2000). Both of these 
observations raise the intriguing possi­
bility that the homeostatic and circa­
dian controls may be more interrelated 
than researchers previously thought. 
Molecular Genetics 
of Circadian Rhythms 
As discussed previously, the properties 
of circadian clocks suggested cyclic 
88 
Alcohol Research & Health 

Overview of Circadian Rhythms 
changes in the expression of certain 
genes as a possible mechanism underlying 
the internal pacemaker. This hypothe­
sis was supported by the demonstration 
in a number of species that the expression 
of genes and the production of proteins 
encoded by those genes were required 
for normal clock function. Nevertheless, 
a completely different experimental 
approach ultimately led to the identifi­
cation of molecular circadian clock 
components. Researchers used chemical 
agents to introduce numerous, random 
mutations into the DNAs of the fruit 
fly, Drosophila melanogaster, and of the 
filamentous fungus Neurospora. The 
resulting mutant organisms then were 
screened for rhythm abnormalities. This 
mutagenesis approach led to the identi­
fication of the first circadian clock 
mutants, which were called period (per) 
and frequency (frq, pronounced “freak”). 
The genes that carried the mutations 
in these organisms were cloned in the 
1980s (for a review, see Wager-Smith 
and Kay 2000). However, considerable 
frustration ensued as researchers sought 
to isolate the equivalent genes in mam­
mals (i.e., mammalian homologs). 
Finally, in the early 1990s, researchers 
began a similar mutagenesis screening 
approach in the mouse and described 
the first mouse circadian mutation, called 
Clock, in 1994 (see King and Takahashi 
2000). In 1997 the gene affected by this 
mutation became the first mammalian 
circadian clock gene to be cloned (King 
and Takahashi 2000). Like the mutants 
of the Per and Frq genes, the altered 
Clock gene both affected the free-running 
rhythm period (i.e., lengthened the 
period) and caused a loss of persistence 
of circadian rhythms under constant 
environmental conditions. Both the 
Table 1 Mammalian Circadian Clock Genes; the Corresponding Genes in the Fruit 
Fly, Drosophila; and the Effects of Changes (i.e., Mutations) in Those 
Genes on the Behavior (i.e., Phenotype) of the Affected Animals 
Mouse 
Drosophila 
Gene 
Alias 
Gene 
Mutant Phenotype 
*Clock 
dClock 
Lengthened period; loss 
of persistent rhythmicity 
in constant conditions 
mPer1 
period 
Reduced amplitude, 
shortened period, or 
loss of rhythm 
*mPer2 
period 
Shortened period, loss 
of rhythm 
*mPer3 
period 
Modest shortening 
of period 
*CKΙε 
tau 
Shortened period in 
(hamster) 
hamster mutants 
*mCry1 
dcry 
Animals lacking the 
mCry2 
mCry1 gene (i.e., mCry1 
knockouts) have short­
ened period; mCry2 
knockouts have length­
ened period; animals 
lacking both genes (i.e., 
double knockouts) have 
a loss of rhythm 
*BMAL1 
MOP3 
cycle 
Loss of rhythm 
?mTim 
timeless 
Role in mammals is 
not clear 
?DBP 
Modest lengthening of 
period 
NOTE: Asterisk (*) indicates that a key role for the gene in timekeeping has been demonstrated by the pheno­
type of a mutant. 
doubletime 
Clock mutant in mice and the Per 
mutant in flies were the first animals 
of their respective species identified 
using such a mutagenesis approach 
in which the mutation manifested as 
altered behavior rather than an altered 
physiological process. 
Since the discovery of the Clock 
gene in mice, the list of circadian clock 
genes identified in mammals has grown 
in a remarkably short period of time 
(see table 1). For example, researchers 
have identified not one, but three mam­
malian genes that correspond to the 
per gene in both their structure (i.e., 
nucleotide sequence) and their function 
(King and Takahashi 2000; Lowrey 
and Takahashi 2000). Some of the pro-
posed circadian clock genes have been 
identified solely based on their similarity 
in sequence to Drosophila clock genes 
and have not been confirmed to have clock 
function based on an examination of the 
behavior of the corresponding mutants. 
Nevertheless, the findings to date clearly 
indicate the outline of a pacemaker that 
is based on a feedback cycle of gene 
expression (see figure 2). 
Importance of the 
Circadian Clock 
for Human Health 
and Well-Being 
Nearly all physiological and behavioral 
functions in humans occur on a rhythmic 
basis, which in turn leads to dramatic 
diurnal rhythms in human performance 
Vol. 25, No. 2, 2001 
89 

capabilities. Regardless of whether it 
results from voluntary (e.g., shift work 
or rapid travel across time zones) or 
involuntary (e.g., illness or advanced age) 
circumstances, a disturbed circadian 
rhythmicity in humans has been associ­
ated with a variety of mental and physi­
cal disorders and may negatively impact 
safety, performance, and productivity. 
Many adverse effects of disrupted circa­
dian rhythmicity may, in fact, be linked 
to disturbances in the sleep-wake cycle. 
Some rhythmic processes are more 
affected by the circadian clock than by 
the sleep-wake state, whereas other 
rhythms are more dependent on the 
sleep-wake state. 
For most animals, the timing of sleep 
and wakefulness under natural condi­
tions is in synchrony with the circadian 
control of the sleep cycle and all other 
circadian-controlled rhythms. Humans, 
however, have the unique ability to 
cognitively override their internal bio­
logical clock and its rhythmic outputs. 
When the sleep-wake cycle is out of 
phase with the rhythms that are con-
trolled by the circadian clock (e.g., 
during shift work or rapid travel across 
time zones), adverse effects may ensue. 
In addition to the sleep disturbances 
associated with jet lag or shift work, sleep 
disorders can occur for many other known 
and unknown reasons. And although 
disturbed sleep is a hallmark of many 
human mental and physiological disorders, 
notably affective disorders, it is often 
unclear whether the sleep disturbances 
contribute to or result from the illness. 
Other circadian rhythm abnormalities 
also are often associated with various dis­
ease states, although again the importance 
of these rhythm abnormalities in the 
development (i.e., etiology) of the disease 
remains unknown (Brunello et al. 2000). 
One important factor contributing 
to researchers’ inability to precisely 
define the role of circadian abnormalities 
in various disease states may be the lack 
of knowledge of how circadian signals 
from the SCN are relayed to target tis-
Nucleus 
Cytoplasm 
E 
E 
Inhibition 
Degradation 
P 
P 
Transactivation 
BMAL1 
mPers 
mCrys 
? 
CK1 
Clock 
Figure 2 Schematic representation of the regulation of genes believed to be involved in the circadian clock. BMAL1, Clock, 
CK1ε, mPer, and mCry all are circadian clock genes identified in mice. (Several variants exist of the mPer and mCry 
genes.) In the cell’s nucleus, the genetic information encoded in these genes is converted into a carrier molecule called 
mRNA (black wavy lines), which is transported into the fluid within the cell (i.e., the cytoplasm). There, the mRNA is 
used to generate the protein products encoded by the circadian clock genes (circles and ovals with colors corre­
sponding to the respective genes). Some of these proteins regulate the activity of certain clock genes by binding to 
“molecular switches” (i.e., E boxes) located in front of those genes. This is called a feedback cycle. Thus, the BMAL1 
and clock proteins promote activation of the Per and mCry genes, whereas Per proteins inhibit activation of those 
genes. The 24-hour cycling comes about as the BMAL1 and Clock proteins induce increased production of Per and 
Cry proteins. As Pers and Crys accumulate, they inhibit their own synthesis, and the protein levels decline. CK1ε 
protein also helps to regulate Clock protein levels by destabilizing Per protein. 
NOTE: BMAL1 = brain and muscle ARNT-like 1; CK1ε = caseine kinase 1 epsilon; mPer = mouse period; mCry = mouse cryptochrome. 
90 
Alcohol Research & Health 

Overview of Circadian Rhythms 
sues. To further elucidate the regulation 
of circadian rhythms, researchers need 
a better understanding of the nature of 
circadian signal output from the SCN 
and of how these output signals may 
be modified once they reach their target 
systems. Such an enhanced understanding 
also would allow for a better delineation 
of the importance of normal temporal 
organization for human health and dis­
ease. The finding that two major causes 
of death—heart attacks and strokes— 
show time-of-day variation in their 
occurrence is a case in point. If scien­
tists knew more about the mechanisms 
responsible for the rhythmicity of these 
disorders, they might be able to iden­
tify more rational therapeutic strategies 
to influence these events. Finally, given 
that dramatic changes occur in the cir­
cadian clock system with advanced age, 
these changes may underlie, or at least 
exacerbate, the age-related deterioration 
in the physical and mental capabilities 
of older adults. 
Conclusions 
Although researchers in just the past 
few years have made great advances in 
understanding the molecular basis of 
circadian rhythmicity, this progress 
builds on extensive research carried out 
in many laboratories during the past 50 
years. Within the same period, other 
researchers in numerous laboratories 
have elucidated the critical role played 
by the SCN in the regulation of circa­
dian rhythmicity in mammals and per-
haps other vertebrates. (For more infor­
mation on these findings and their rele­
vance, the reader can refer to a variety of 
resources on the World Wide Web, 
some of which are listed in table 2.) 
Most animals are content to obey 
their SCN and let it orchestrate the 
expression of a multitude of circadian 
rhythms. Humans, however, have a mind 
of their own and often use this mind 
to disobey their “internal clock”—for 
example, with an increasing tendency 
toward 24-hour availability for busi­
ness. The potential consequences of 
such an increasingly 24-hour on-call 
lifestyle are unknown at this point, but 
the evidence does not bode well. 
The challenge for researchers and 
clinicians now is to determine not only 
the cause but also the consequences for 
human health and disease of disruptions 
in the temporal organization of the cir­
cadian system. These issues also include 
the question of what role alcohol may 
play in the disruption of normal circa­
dian rhythms and the biological clock. 
Table 2 Chronobiological Resources on the World Wide Web 
Web Site 
Description 
http://www.nwu.edu/ccbm/ 
Web site of Northwestern University’s 
Center for Sleep and Circadian Biology 
http://www.sleepquest.com/ 
Information site of William Dement’s Sleep 
Research Center 
http://www.med.stanford.edu/school/ 
Narcolepsy site created by Emmanuel 
Psychiatry/narcolepsy 
Mignot at Stanford University 
http://www.sleepfoundation.org/ 
Web site of the National Sleep Foundation 
http://www.srbr.org/ 
Web site of the Society for Research on 
Biological Rhythms 
http://www.cbt.virginia.edu/ 
Web site of the Center for Biological 
Timing at the University of Virginia 
http://www.hhmi.org/grants/lectures 
Web site providing Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute Holiday Lectures 
This question is addressed in more detail 
in this special issue of Alcohol Research 
& Health. Drs. Wasielewski and Holloway 
review ways in which alcohol and the 
body’s circadian rhythm interact, using 
body temperature as an index of circa­
dian rhythm function. The sleep-wake 
cycle, which constitutes a central aspect 
of circadian rhythms in particular, is sub­
ject to modification by alcohol; alcohol’s 
effects on the sleep of nonalcoholics and 
alcoholics are discussed by Drs. Roehrs 
and Roth and by Dr. Brower, respectively. 
As indicated in this article, disturbances 
of the normal circadian rhythmicity can 
result in serious health consequences, 
including psychiatric disorders, such as 
depression. At the same time, psychoac­
tive drugs, such as antidepressants, also 
have chronobiological effects. Dr. 
Rosenwasser explores those associations 
and discusses alcohol’s effects in human 
and animal models of depression. Other 
influences of alcohol on the biological 
clock may be even more subtle and 
remain rather speculative, such as the 
consequences of prenatal alcohol expo-
sure, which is discussed by Drs. Earnest, 
Chen, and West. Finally, not only may 
alcohol consumption affect circadian 
rhythms, but circadian factors, such as 
the light-dark cycle, may also influence 
alcohol consumption. This topic is dis­
cussed by Drs. Hiller-Sturmhöfel and 
Kulkosky. Together, these articles offer 
readers insight into the interesting and 
complex interactions that exist between 
alcohol and the circadian rhythms that 
govern much of the behavior and well-
being of all organisms, including 
humans. ■ 
References 
ASCHOFF, J. Exogenous and endogenous compo­
nents in circadian rhythms. Cold Spring Harbor 
Symposia on Quantitative Biology: Volume XXV. 
Biological Clocks. New York: Cold Spring Harbor 
Press, 1960. pp. 11–28. 
BRUNELLO, N.; ARMITAGE, R.; FEINBERG, I.; ET AL. 
Depression and sleep disorders: Clinical relevance, 
economic burden and pharmacological treatment. 
Neuropsychobiology 42:107–119, 2000. 
DEMENT, W.C. History of sleep physiology and 
medicine. In: Kryer, M.H.; Roth, T.; and Dement, 
W.C., eds. Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine. 
3d ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 2000. 
Vol. 25, No. 2, 2001 
91 

G L O S S A R Y 
Every scientific field has its specific terminology; the scientific area of biological rhythms and sleep is no exception. This glossary 
defines some of the terms that readers may encounter in this article and throughout this special issue of Alcohol Research & Health. 
Chronobiology: A subdiscipline of biology concerned with the 
timing of biological events, especially repetitive or cyclical 
phenomena, in individual organisms. 
Circadian: A term derived from the Latin phrase “circa diem,” 
meaning “about a day”; refers to biological variations or 
rhythms with a cycle of approximately 24 hours. Circadian 
rhythms are self-sustaining (i.e., free running), meaning that 
they will persist when the organism is placed in an environ­
ment devoid of time cues, such as constant light or constant 
darkness. For comparison, see diurnal, infradian, and ultradian. 
Circadian time (CT): A standardized 24-hour notation of the 
phase in a circadian cycle that represents an estimation of 
the organism’s subjective time. CT 0 indicates the begin­
ning of a subjective day, and CT 12 is the beginning of a 
subjective night. For example, for a nocturnal rodent, the 
beginning of a subjective night (i.e., CT 12) begins with the 
onset of activity, whereas for a diurnal species, CT 0 would 
be the beginning of activity. For comparison, see Zeitgeber 
time. 
DD: A conventional notation for an environment kept in con­
tinuous darkness (as opposed to a light-dark cycle). For 
comparison, see LD. 
Diurnal: Varying with time of day. Diurnal rhythms may per­
sist when the organism is placed in an environment devoid 
of time cues, such as constant light or constant darkness. 
Therefore, diurnal variations can be either light driven or 
clock driven. For comparison, see circadian. 
Entrainment: The process of synchronization of a timekeeping 
mechanism to the environment, such as to a light-dark 
cycle, or LD. For comparison, see free running. 
Free running: The state of an organism (or rhythm) in the 
absence of any entraining stimuli. Typically, subjects are 
kept in constant dim light or constant darkness to assess 
their free-running rhythms. For comparison, see entrainment. 
Infradian: A term derived from the Latin phrase “infra diem,” 
meaning “less than a day”; refers to biological cycles that last 
more than 1 day and, therefore, have a frequency of less 
than one per day. For comparison, see circadian and 
ultradian. 
LD: Conventional notation for a light-dark environmental 
cycle; the numbers of hours of light and dark are typically 
presented separated by a colon. For example, LD 16:8 
denotes a cycle consisting of 16 hours of light and 8 hours 
of dark. For comparison, see DD. 
Masking: The obscuring of the “true” state of a rhythm by 
conditions that prevent its usual expression. Usually, the 
phase of an entrained rhythm or the absence of entrainment 
(e.g., in an animal that is unable to entrain because of some 
defect) is said to be masked by a light cycle. For example, 
the aversion of a nocturnal rodent to bright light results in 
its activity onset appearing to coincide with the absence of 
light, or “lights off,” when the animal actually has been 
awake for hours. For comparison, see entrainment. 
Nonrapid eye movement (NREM) sleep: Sleep stages that 
include the “deeper” stages of sleep in which dreaming typi­
cally does not occur. Also referred to as slow-wave sleep. For 
comparison, see rapid eye movement sleep. 
Phase shift: A change in the phase of a rhythm. This change 
can be measured by observing a change in the timing of a 
phase reference point (e.g., activity onset or the nocturnal 
rise in the release of the hormone melatonin) from the tim­
ing expected based on previous, free-running cycles. Phase 
shifts may be either advances (i.e., the phase reference point 
occurs earlier than normal) or delays (i.e., the phase refer­
ence point occurs later than normal). 
Phase-response curve (PRC): A graphical summary of the 
phase shifts produced by a particular manipulation, such as 
a light pulse or a pharmacological treatment, as a function 
of the phase (i.e., circadian time) at which the manipulation 
occurs. Defining the PRC to light has enabled researchers 
to understand and predict how entrainment to light cycles 
is accomplished. 
Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep: A stage of light sleep char­
acterized by rapid eye movements and associated with 
dreaming. Also called paradoxical sleep. For comparison, see 
nonrapid eye movement sleep. 
Suprachiasmatic nucleus or nuclei (SCN): A cluster of nerve 
cells located in the brain region called the hypothalamus 
that is responsible for generating and coordinating circadian 
rhythmicity in mammals. 
Ultradian: A term derived from the Latin phrase “ultra diem,” 
meaning “more than a day”; refers to biological cycles that last 
less than 1 day and, therefore, have a frequency of more than 
one per day. For comparison, see circadian and infradian. 
Zeitgeber: A German word literally meaning “time-giver.” A 
time cue capable of entraining circadian rhythms. Light rep­
resents the most important Zeitgeber. 
Zeitgeber time (ZT): A standardized 24-hour notation of the 
phase in an entrained circadian cycle in which ZT 0 indi­
cates the beginning of day, or the light phase, and ZT 12 is 
the beginning of night, or the dark phase. For comparison, 
see circadian time. 
92 
Alcohol Research & Health 

Overview of Circadian Rhythms 
FRANKEN, P.; LOPEZ-MOLINA, L.; MARCACCI, L.; 
SCHIBLER, U.; AND TAFTI, M. The transcription 
factor DBP affects circadian sleep consolidation and 
rhythmic EEG activity. Journal of Neuroscience 
20(2):617–625, 2000. 
KING, D.P., AND TAKAHASHI, J.S. Molecular genet­
ics of circadian rhythms in mammals. Annual 
Review of Neuroscience 23:713–742, 2000. 
KLEIN, D.C.; MOORE, R.Y.; AND REPPERT, S.M. 
Suprachiasmatic Nucleus: The Mind’s Clock. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1991. 
LOWREY, P.L., AND TAKAHASHI, J.S. Genetics of 
the mammalian circadian system: Photic entrain­
ment, circadian pacemaker mechanisms, and post-
translational control. Annual Review of Genetics 
34:533–562, 2000. 
MISTLBERGER, R.E.; BERGMANN, B.M.; AND 
RECHTSCHAFFEN, A. Relationships among wake 
episode lengths, contiguous sleep episode lengths, 
and electroencephalographic delta waves in rats 
with suprachiasmatic nuclei lesions. Sleep 10(1): 
12–24, 1987. 
NAYLOR, E.; BERGMANN, B.M.; KRAUSKI, K.; ET AL. 
The circadian clock mutation alters sleep homeostasis 
in the mouse. Journal of Neuroscience 20(21):8138– 
8143, 2000. 
PITTENDRIGH, C.S. Circadian rhythms and the cir­
cadian organization of living systems. Cold Spring 
Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology: Volume 
XXV. Biological Clocks. New York: Cold Spring 
Harbor Press, 1960. pp. 159–184. 
RALPH, M.R.; FOSTER, R.G.; DAVIS, F.C.; AND 
MENAKER, M. Transplanted suprachiasmatic 
nucleus determines circadian period. Science 
247:975–978. 1990. 
STOKKAN, K.A.; YAMAZAKI, S.; TEI, H.; SAKAKI, Y.; 
AND MENAKER, M. Entrainment of the circadian 
clock in the liver by feeding. Science 291:490–493, 
2001. 
WAGER-SMITH, K., AND KAY, S.A. Circadian rhythm 
genetics: From flies to mice to humans. Nature 
Genetics 26:23–27, 2000. 
YAMAZAKI, S.; NUMANO, R.; ABE, M.; ET AL. Resetting 
central and peripheral circadian oscillators in trans-
genic rats. Science 288:682–685, 2000. 
Join us in Phoenix, Atlanta, 
San Diego, and Amelia Island 
The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) invites you to visit its scientific 
exhibit at upcoming conferences around the country. The Alcohol and Alcohol Problems Science 
Database (ETOH), recent NIAAA publications, and research grant information will be on display. 
■ Society for the Advancement of 
■ Society for Neuroscience 
Chicanos and Native Americans 
November 10–15 
in Science 
San Diego, CA 
September 27–30 
Phoenix, AZ 
■ American Academy of Addiction 
Psychiatry—12th Annual Meeting 
■ American Public Health Association 
and Symposium 
October 21–25 
December 13–16 
Atlanta, GA 
Amelia Island, FL 
The Alcohol and Alcohol Problems Science Database (ETOH), recent NIAAA 
publications, and research grant information will be on display. 
Vol. 25, No. 2, 2001 
93 
